Next time…
Beer
Ryan Elias
Penn State Food Science
elias@psu.edu
Chemistry Processing
Microbiology
Brewing
In chat: Do you like beer?  Why or why not?“It has long been speculated that 
humans’ thirst for beer may have been 
the stimulus behind cereal 
domestication , and some scientists 
have attributed this invention to the 
Natufians, a Neolithic culture that 
inhabited the Levant region of the 
eastern Mediterranean from about 
13,000 to 9,700 BC.”
“Alcohol making and food storage were 
among the major technological 
innovations that eventually led to the 
development of civilizations in the 
world”
“They used bedrock mortars for 
pounding and cooking plant -foods, and 
for brewing wheat/barley -based beer, 
likely served in ritual feasts 13,000 
years ago"
“Beer brewing may have been, at least 
in part, an underlying motivation to 
cultivate cereals in the southern Levant, 
supporting the beer hypothesis 
proposed by archaeologists more than 
six decades ago.”FDSC / INTAG 499 –International Food Production
Germany & Austria
May 11 –20, 2020
FDSC / INTAG 499 is an embedded study tour course that examines industrial food 
production in foreign countries.  We will be focusing on southern Germany and 
northern Austria this spring.  The course will involve several pre -trip lectures and 
meetings, followed by 9 days of food production facility tours from May 11 –20.
Undergraduate and graduate students in food science are encouraged to apply. 
Course pre -requisites: FDSC 400 & FDSC 408 or permission of instructors.
Instructors: Dr. Helene Hopfer & Dr. Ryan Elias
Application due date : December 1, 2019
Course application and FAQ’s: https:// bit.ly /2nSshOV
FD SC / INTAG 499 –Brewing & Malting Science in Europe
Denmark
March 2 –11, 2018
FD SC / INTAG 499 is an embedded study tour course that examines the European brewing 
and malting industries.  We will be focusing on Denmark this spring –a country with a long 
and storied brewing tradition.  The course will involve several pre -trip lectures and meetings, 
followed by a week of brewing facility tours in Denmark during spring break (2018). 
Undergraduate and graduate students in food science are encouraged to apply. 
Course pre -requisites: FD SC 400 and FD SC 408.
Instructor: Dr. Ryan Elias ( elias@psu.edu )
Department of Food Science
Application due date: October 2, 2017
Course application and FAQ’s: http://bit.ly/2xt11WxBeer Wine
Yeast
Alcohol
Enzymes
Yeast
Alcohol
(plus flavor, plus bubbles)
Yeast
Foam
Bread
Yeast make alcohol and 
carbon dioxide gas when
they eat sugar.Beer Wine
G
F+
Saccharomyces
cerevisiae
Ethanol
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
Amylases
G
 G +
Saccharomyces
cerevisiae
EthanolAmylose & 
AmylopectinSimple sugars 
(glucose, fructose)
(plus heat, plus hops, 
plus carbon dioxide)
Bread
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
Amylose & 
Amylopectin
Saccharomyces
cerevisiae
Foamed 
GlutenThe Trick = “Malting”
•Definition: The process by which grains 
(barley) are intentionally germinated and 
subsequently dried by heat How beer is made
1. Malt barley
2. Mash
3. Lauter
4. Boil
5. Cool & pitch yeast
6. Ferment
7. Age/Finish/Filter
8. Bottle
2RowSideView.vsd
6RowSideView.vsd
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
Enzyme
G
 G
 G
 G + + +~2 daysDrying & Heating 
How beer is made
1. Malt barley
2. Mash
3. Lauter
4. Boil
5. Cool & pitch yeast
6. Ferment
7. Age/Finish/Filter
8. Bottle
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
Enzyme
G
 G
 G
 G + + +How beer is made
1. Malt barley
2. Mash
3. Lauter
4. Boil
5. Cool & pitch yeast
6. Ferment
7. Age/Finish/Filter
8. Bottle
Drain sugary liquid (“ wort ”) 
and rinse grains with waterHow beer is made
1. Malt barley
2. Mash
3. Lauter
4. Boil
5. Cool & pitch yeast
6. Ferment
7. Age/Finish/Filter
8. Bottle
What does boiling do?
•Sterilize the liquid (wort)
•Evaporate water
•Heat provides energy for 
chemical reactions in hops 
(we’ll discuss this soon!)The role of water
•Malting, Step 1: Add water
•Malting, Step 2: Then take it away
•Mashing: Add water
•Boiling: Take some away
•Final product: Add some moreHow beer is made
1. Malt barley
2. Mash
3. Lauter
4. Boil
5. Cool & pitch yeast
6. Ferment
7. Age/Finish/Filter
8. Bottle
Hops provide: 
* bitterness
*aroma
*foam
*stabilityCones
Ripe lupulin
glands Ripe lupulin
glands Cross section
The Plant Cell, Vol. 20: 186 –200 1.Hop acids provide 
bitterness (and 
stability, and stable 
foam)
2.Hop oilprovides 
aroma
Brewing with hops
•Adding hops early in the boil results in more bitterness
•Adding hops late in the boil results in more aroma
•Adding hops after the boil results in even more aromaHow beer is made
1. Malt barley
2. Mash
3. Lauter
4. Boil
5. Cool & pitch yeast
6. Ferment
7. Age/Finish/Filter
8. Bottle
Does this seem risky?How beer is made
1. Malt barley
2. Mash
3. Lauter
4. Boil
5. Cool & pitch yeast
6. Ferment
7. Age/Finish/Filter
8. BottleSugar
Ethanol
+  Carbon dioxide
+  Heat
jwvraets.blogspot.com
Ales vs. LagersHow beer is made
1. Malt barley
2. Mash
3. Lauter
4. Boil
5. Cool & pitch yeast
6. Ferment
7. Age/Finish/Filter
8. Bottle
How beer is made
1. Malt barley
2. Mash
3. Lauter
4. Boil
5. Cool & pitch yeast
6. Ferment
7. Age/Finish/Filter
8. Bottle
hofbrauhauslasWhat’s “best”? Disadvantages vs Advantages?Questions?
elias@psu.eduHunger & Famine
Hunger and Satiety
•Body senses (i) the gut and (ii) nutrient status in the blood and 
releases behavioral hormones in response  
•The hormones are detected in the brain and trigger different 
behavioral responses (eat vs. stop eating)  
•Psychological factors are also relevant (thinking about food)Hunger (individual physiology) vs. Food Insecurity (household 
level assessment of economic and social situation)
•High food security:  no reported indications of food-access problems 
or limitations.  
•Marginal food security : one or two reported indications—typically of 
anxiety over food sufficiency or shortage of food in the house. Little or 
no indication of changes in diets or food intake.  
•Low food security : reports of reduced quality, variety, or desirability of 
diet. Little or no indication of reduced food intake.  
•Very low food security : Reports of multiple indications of disrupted 
eating patterns and reduced food intake.
https://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/food-nutrition-assistance/food-security-in-the-u-s/Example: "We worried whether our food would run out before we got money to 
buy more." Was that often, sometimes, or never true for you in the last 12 
months?(households that were food insecure at 
some time during year)~34 million 
people•Compare very low 
% households with 
different levels of food 
insecurity reporting these 
behaviors in 2016
•Poverty threshold in US is  
$31,843 for a family of 4.  
•“Median family income of a 
student from Penn State is 
$101,800 ”
 % of households2021 PSU Food and Housing Needs Survey
•“Overall, 24.1% of students indicated that 
they identify “moderately well” to 
“extremely well” with the statement that 
they have had some trouble securing food 
“in the last 30 days.” Of these about half 
reduced food intake
•“Results show heightened impacts 
among respondents who self-identified as 
members of an underrepresented minority 
group, international students, students 
who have disabilities, or students who self-
identified as sexually diverse or gender 
diverse, also in line with national trends.”
•Student emergency fund
https://www.psu.edu/news/campus-life/story/penn-state-shares-results-food-and-housing-needs-survey/  Satiety  
Hunger  
Food security  
Starvation  
FamineWhen He broke the third seal, I heard the 
third living creature saying, “Come.” I looked, 
and behold, a black horse; and he who sat on 
it had a pair of scales in his hand. And I heard 
something like a voice in the center of the 
four living creatures saying, “A quart of wheat 
for a penny, and three quarts of barley for a 
penny; but do not damage the oil and the 
wine.” – Revelation 6:5-6
“Apocalypse” (woodcut) Albrecht Dürer 1498
Pestilence, War, Famine 
and DeathFamine
•A widespread scarcity of food leading 
to malnutrition, epidemic and mortality  
•Common across all historic farming 
societies  
•Associated with pestilence, war, and 
death  
•Caused by a lack of food (?)
When He broke the third seal, I heard the third living creature saying, “Come.” I 
looked, and behold, a black horse; and he who sat on it had a pair of scales in his 
hand. And I heard something like a voice in the center of the four living creatures 
saying, “ A quart of wheat for a penny, and three quarts of barley for a penny; 
but do not damage the oil and the wine .” – Revelation 6:5-6
The third Horseman, Famine on the Black Horse as 
depicted in the Angers Apocalypse Tapestry (1372-82). 
Taken from WikipediaCausing Famine
•Ravaging (chevauchée) as a 
tactic in medieval Europe 
(and into ancient times)  
•"the main and principal 
point in war is to secure 
plenty of provisions for 
oneself and to destroy the 
enemy by famine. Famine is 
more terrible than the 
sword .” Vertigus in de re 
Militari (5th century)
Famine Relief
•Before the modern period, famine 
was consciously used as a military 
tactic but government had 
relatively little capacity for famine 
relief. Consequently famine was 
seen as an “act of God”
In response to the great famine of 1315-17, 
Edward II of England: restricted food exports and 
encouraged imports, tried to limit brewing of 
grains into beer, encouraged Bishops to preach 
against grain hoarding, 
Sharp, B. (2013). Royal paternalism and the moral economy in the reign of Edward II: The response to the Great Famine. Economic 
History Review , 66(2), 628–647Preventing 
Famine
an “act of God”Bengal in the early 1940s •Part of the British Empire, 
although Indian Independence 
movement increasingly powerful. 
Calcutta the largest city  
•Very poor, rural population, 
dependent on rice, and to a lesser 
extent fish.  
•Many peasants stuck in debt-
bondage to landowners  
•Transportation by boat and trains  
•Britain (including its empire) was 
at war with the Japanese empire. 
Food shocks in 1942
•Natural disasters. Cyclone and 
storm surge -> rice disease 
(mold)  
•War. Japanese invasion of 
Burma (early 1942). Refugees, 
food imports cease. 
Proximate cause – the 
immediate cause of the famineMigration, starvation and disease 1942, 1943.  
~3 million deaths
On the city streets  
Roam strange creatures,  
Human-like, yet, not quite human,  
Cruel caricatures of humanity!  
Yet they move and speak,  
Like debris they pile up by the road,  
Sit, foraging food, on piles of garbage  
Weary  
And cry out for phyan.  
  - Premendra Mitra (1904-1988), “ Phyan “
https://coldnoon.com/journal/coldnoon-cities-mapping-the-metropolis-vol-i/a-metropolis-of-hunger-calcuttas-poetry-of-the-
famine-1943/“No famine has ever taken place 
in the history of the world in a 
functioning democracy.”*  
 
Amartya Sen (1933-)  
Harvard – economics and philosophy  
Nobel Prize in Economics 1998
*Not universally accepted as true!Why?Would the food shocks in themselves cause a 
famine? Search for an underlying cause.
•Underlying fragility of rural society  
•Economic consequences of military build up -> urban economic boom, inflation  
•Effects of the British response to war crisis on the food supply  
•diversion of resources to military workers -> hoarding  
•destruction of boats  
•British government initially ignored the issue  
•When relief came, it was inadequate  
•Pressures of war? Shipping?  
•British antipathy to Indians (Churchill -> Gandhi)?
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x1Vw7Z_2SD8
“In so far as food supply itself has any 
influence on the prevalence of starvation, that 
influence is seen as working through the 
entitlement relations. If one person in eight 
starves regularly in the world,  this is seen as 
the result of his inability to establish 
entitlement to enough food…”  Sen on “Entitlements”*
•Food supply statements tell you how much food there is, starvation is 
about an individual’s (lack of) entitlement to food  
•“Do I have an entitlement to this bowl of rice?”  
•Did I grow enough rice myself?  
•Do I have enough money to pay for it?  
•Do I have a job and does it pay enough?  
•Will you give it to me?*in the US “entitlements” often mean some sort of government welfare benefit. This is not what Sen means.
Sen, A. (1981). Poverty and famines: An essay on entitlement and deprivation . Oxford University . Book of Revelation: “A quart of wheat for a 
penny, and three quarts of barley for a 
penny”. If food is too expensive you don’t 
have an entitlement
Starvation results from a failure of 
production entitlements
Starvation results from a failure 
of exchange entitlements
Non-entitlement transfer (charity)Non-entitlement transfers – charity
•“The reason why there are no famines in the rich developed countries 
is not because people are generally rich on the average. Rich they 
certainly are when they have jobs and earn a proper wage; but for 
large numbers of people this condition fails to hold for long periods of 
time, and the exchange entitlements in the absence of social security* 
arrangements could provide very meagre commodity bundles indeed.”
* All government and charity benefits. Not just the US federal program with the same name
Sen, A. (1981). Poverty and famines: An essay on entitlement 
and deprivation . Oxford University Press . Deaths per 100,000 people per decadeThe Death of Famine?
Ó Gráda, C. (2007). Making Famine History. Journal of Economic Literature , 45(1), 5–38. 
Next time…
Proteins
Do you or someone 
you know try to eat 
more  protein?  How 
do you do this and 
why?What are proteins?
•Polymers made from 21 types of amino 
acid (9 are essential)  
•The sequence of amino acids in each 
specific protein is coded in DNA  
•Protein chain folds into a specific shape  
•Shape give rise to function:  
•Catalysts (enzymes),  
•Signaling (some hormones)  
•Locomotion (actin and myosin in muscle)  
•Structure (collagen in tendon)  
•Transport (hemoglobin transporting oxygen 
in blood)
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK21177/
Alanine
Glutamic  
acid
Phenylalanine
Carbon –Carbon - NitrogenSide chain  
|What are proteins?
•Polymers made from 21 types of amino 
acid (9 are essential)  
•The sequence of amino acids in each 
specific protein is coded in DNA  
•Protein chain folds into a specific shape  
•Shape give rise to function:  
•Catalysts (enzymes),  
•Signaling (some hormones)  
•Locomotion (actin and myosin in muscle)  
•Structure (collagen in tendon)  
•Transport (hemoglobin transporting oxygen 
in blood)
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK21177/C C
HNH2R
HOOC C
HNH2R
HOO
C C
HNHR
HOOC C
HNH2R
O
[-C-C-N]- chain with 
different size groups 
(“R”) sticking off to the 
sidesWhat are proteins?
•Polymers made from 21 types of amino 
acid (9 are essential)  
•The sequence of amino acids in each 
specific protein is coded in DNA  
•Protein chain folds into a specific shape  
•Shape give rise to function:  
•Catalysts (enzymes),  
•Signaling (some hormones)  
•Locomotion (actin and myosin in muscle)  
•Structure (collagen in tendon)  
•Transport (hemoglobin transporting oxygen 
in blood)
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK21177/
B-lactoglobulin in milk
Actin-myosin complex in muscleHow do we know we need 
protein in the diet?
•Animal tissues to contain a lot of nitrogen, air contains a 
lot of nitrogen, many foods do not contain nitrogen  
•1815 Magendie fed dogs exclusively sugar, olive oil, or 
butter and watched them over several weeks  
•Concluded animals get their tissue nitrogen from foods  
•“diversity and multiplicity of aliments is an important 
rule of hygiene; which is, moreover, indicated to us by 
our instincts” (eat a balanced diet)
Carpenter, K. J. (2018). A Short History of Nutritional Science: Part 1 (1785–1885). The Journal of Nutrition , 133(3), 638–645. 
François Magendie  
1783-1855  
French physiologist A Penn State Aside
•Evan Pugh (1828-1864)  
•Can plants assimilate nitrogen 
from the air or to they need to 
absorb it from their roots?
(1862)
Recommended Protein Intake Debate
•RDA: The minimum amount required to prevent disease  
•Grown Male: 55 g; Grown Female: 45 g (i.e., a macronutrient ) 
•Acceptable Macronutrient Distribution Range:  
•Grown Male: 65 – 228 g per day  
•Grown Female: 50 – 170 g  
•Are all proteins the same?  
•Protein quality tries to account for protein digestibility and 
quantity of essential amino acids. (Example – maize protein is 
poor quality because it lacks lysine and tryptophan)
Dietary Reference Intakes for Energy, Carbohydrate. Fiber, Fat, Fatty Acids, Cholesterol, Protein, and Amino Acid s (2002/2005)  
http://www.nationalacademies.org/hmd/~/media/Files/Activity%20Files/Nutrition/DRI-Tables/8_Macronutrient%20Summary.pdf?la=enBack to humans…Protein rich foods
•Meat  
•Eggs  
•Dairy  
•Beans  
•Nuts and seeds
But all of this should be part of a healthy diet
World Resource Institute 20179Protein Deficiency Diseases
•Kwashiorkor – “disease of the deposed child”  
•Protein energy malnutritionCicely Williams  
1893-1992  
Anglo-Jamaican doctor
Williams, C. D. (1933). A nutritional disease of childhood associated with maize. Archives of Disease in Childhood , viii, 423.
“Fuel” for athletes (2010)Do you need  more protein?•This is what surveys 
say consumers 
believe , not what’s 
trueWhat makes 
protein so 
attractive?Current 
Protein Trend
https://foodinsight.org/protein-perceptions-and-consumption-behaviors/http://www.blog.generalmills.com/
2014/05/a-protein-boost-for-your-
breakfast/May 2014 - Build products to catch the trend  
Added plant proteins are difficult ingredients to work with in many foods 
but food technology can helpWho are these 
products for?Differentiate products for a niche market  20182019
Coconut milk (coconut cream, water), prebiotic fiber, organic cane sugar, erythritol, caramel swirl (sugar, tapioca syrup, 
water, palm kernel oil, natural flavors, brown rice protein , salt), chocolate swirl (sugar, corn syrup, water, cocoa, 
chocolate liquor, corn starch, coconut oil, natural flavor, salt), rice protein concentrate , roasted peanuts (sunflower 
oil), vegetable glycerin, natural flavor, pea protein isolate , high fat cocoa, organic carob gum, organic guar gum, sea 
salt, organic sunflower lecithin, organic stevia leaf extract.https://halotop.com/dairy-free/candy-bar-df/What is the 
appeal of this?Reasons to believe a product is better/healthier  •Nutrition : The science that tries to relate diet to physiological 
status and health  
•Reductionism : Reducing some complex phenomenon into a single 
component or property.  
•Nutritionism : Reducing food and food choice to its component 
nutrients.  
•“This food is good because  it has 20 g of protein”  
•Nutritional determinism : Claims of a direct cause-and-effect link 
between a nutrient and a particular health outcome (see food and 
cancer talk next week)  
•“I’ve eaten 20 g of protein so I’m going to be ripped! ”
Slide and ideas from Dr. Scott LoughreedNext time…
Calories
From a scientific point of view a calorie is a measure of heat  
A Calorie (used in foods) the the energy used to raise the temperature of a kilogram of water by 1 oC 
A calorie (used in chemistry) is the energy needed to raise the temperature of a gram of water by 1 oC.Air is a 
thing!Robert Boyle  and Robert 
Hooke (1660) used an air 
pump to make a vacuum 
(“rarefied air”)
Glass bulb is about 15 inches in diameter
PumpStopcockSealable opening
Sample bulbAn Experiment on a Bird in an Air Pump  
Joseph Wright, 1768
Robert Boyle, 1660
So, what did 
Boyle learn 
from all this?Mayow: A portion  of 
the air is important
•John Mayow (1668)  
•Both combustion and 
respiration consumed part 
of the air  
•How would you determine 
animals and fire are using 
the same part of the air?
The Biological Calorimeter
•Antoine-Laurent Lavoisier (French 
Chemist, 1743-1794)  
•How much heat does burning 
charcoal give off?  
•How much heat does a living 
guinea pig give off?  
•But how might you compare the 
two?
Marie-Anne Paulze  
(1758-1836)•Energy may be converted from one 
form to another, but the total amount 
of energy is conserved.  
•Guinea pigs obey the first law  
•Respiration is slow combustion
(everybody’s 9 th grade digestion equation)
measure measureThe First Law of ThermodynamicsThe Bomb 
Calorimeter
Is this a reasonable 
way to measure the 
energy of food?•Burn a known mass of food in 
oxygen and measure the heat 
releasedThe Respiration 
Calorimeter (1890s)
•Measure everything going in 
(air, water, food)  
•Measure everything coming 
out. (carbon dioxide, feces, 
urine, heat)  
•The Armsby calorimeter  
(longer video )
Atwater factors
•4 Calories per gram for carbohydrates  
•4 Calories per gram for proteins  
•9 Calories per gram for fats  
•7 Calories per gram of alcohol
http://www.fao.org/docrep/006/Y5022E/y5022e04.htm
William Atwater (1844-1907)  
Wesleyan UniversitySo what does all that measurement mean to 
have a good diet?
Imagine you are William Atwater in the early 20 th Century*.  You are 
committed to helping poor people get the best diet they can. What 
foods do you recommend?
What you measure shapes how you think
Atwater, 1894*vitamins are a pretty new ideaAtwater, 1894
How can you eat 
efficiently ?If calories are the most important thing…
Cullather, N. (2007). The Foreign Policy of the Calorie. The American Historical Review , 112(2), 337–364. (1903)
(1915)Next time…
Vitamins  
Part 1: Modern Understanding
What are vitamins?
•Vital amines (believed to be amino acids)-> vitamines -> vitamins  
•Small organic molecules (i.e., not polymers)  
•Needed for essential biological purpose  
•Not synthesized in sufficient quantities in the body
Thiamin (vitamin B1) Ascorbic acid (vitamin C)https://www.multivitaminguide.org/blog/
are-vitamins-just-a-scam/Sometimes choline given as #14A quick review of modern knowledge
•Vitamins are MICRONUTRIENTS  
•Vitamins come in multiple 
molecular forms  
•Prolonged lack in diet -> disease  
•Food plants and animals contain 
vitamins  
•Vitamins can be destroyed by 
processing  
•Vitamins can be synthesized and 
supplemented into foodsExample: Vitamin A
•Vitamins are MICRONUTRIENTS  
•Vitamins come in multiple 
molecular forms  
•Prolonged lack in diet -> disease  
•Food plants and animals contain 
vitamins  
•Vitamins can be destroyed by 
processing  
•Vitamins can be synthesized and 
supplemented into foods
https://ods.od.nih.gov/
factsheets/VitaminA-
HealthProfessional/(RAE: retinol activity equivalents measured in micrograms)
Example: Vitamin A
•Vitamins are MICRONUTRIENTS  
•Vitamins come in multiple 
molecular forms  
•Prolonged lack in diet -> disease  
•Food plants and animals contain 
vitamins  
•Vitamins can be destroyed by 
processing  
•Vitamins can be synthesized and 
supplemented into foodsRetinol  
Retinal  
Retinoic acid  
Several provitamin  carotenoid 
pigments, esp. B-carotene
Example: Vitamin A
•Vitamins are MICRONUTRIENTS  
•Vitamins come in multiple 
molecular forms  
•Prolonged lack in diet -> disease  
•Food plants and animals contain 
vitamins  
•Vitamins can be destroyed by 
processing  
•Vitamins can be synthesized and 
supplemented into foodsChildhood blindness  
WHO: ‘ An estimated 250 000 
to 500 000 vitamin A-
deficient children become 
blind every year, half of them 
dying within 12 months of 
losing their sight .”  Largely SE 
Asia and Africa
http://www.who.int/nutrition/topics/vad/en/Example: Vitamin A
•Vitamins are MICRONUTRIENTS  
•Vitamins come in multiple 
molecular forms  
•Prolonged lack in diet -> disease  
•Food plants and animals contain 
vitamins  
•Vitamins can be destroyed by 
processing  
•Vitamins can be synthesized and 
added in foods
https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminA-HealthProfessional/FoodIU* 
perPercen
t
serving DV*
Sweet potato, baked in skin, 1 whole 28,058 561
Beef liver, pan fried, 3 ounces 22,175 444
Spinach, frozen, boiled, ½ cup 11,458 229
Carrots, raw, ½ cup 9,189 184
Apricots, dried, sulfured, 10 halves 1,261 25
Broccoli, boiled, ½ cup 1,208 24
Ice cream, French vanilla, soft serve, 
1 cup 1,014 20
Cheese, ricotta, part skim, 1 cup 945 19
Ready-to-eat cereal, fortified with 
10% of the DV for vitamin A, ¾–1 
cup 500 10
Milk, fat-free or skim, with added 
vitamin A and vitamin D, 1 cup 500 10
Chicken, breast meat and skin, 
roasted, ½ breast 18 0* IU, International Units often used to describe vitamin 
effectivenessHow did we come 
to know all of this?
http://nursescircle.com/vitamins-and-deficiency-
diseases-june-2015/Vitamins:  
Part 2: Scurvy
Scurvy
•Relatively rare until Europeans started long sea voyages (> 6 weeks)Ascorbic acid (C) deficiency  
•Lethargy, weakness  
•Loose teeth  
•Swollen gums, legs  
•Redness and swelling of 
wounds/scars  
•Prone to bruising  
•Death (hemorrhage)Mass Casualties in the 18 th Century
George Anson (1697-1762)
•George Anson led a circumnavigation of the earth 1740-1744 as part of the 
British war with Spain  
•188 of 1854 sailors survived (war casualties, disease, but also scurvy)
But they already knew…kinda
•Vasco da Gama 1497  in the Indian 
Ocean: “ Many of our men fell ill here, 
their feet and hands swelling, and their 
gums growing over their teeth so that 
they could not eat ” but after trading for 
oranges “ It pleased God in his mercy 
that … all our sick recovered their health 
for the air of the place is very good ”
https://www.cnrs-scrn.org/northern_mariner/vol20/tnm_20_57-70.pdf https://www.atlasobscura.com/articles/scurvyInfantile Scurvy: A Historical Perspective  
Kumaravel Rajakumar  doi:  10.1542/peds.108.4.e76
Richard Hawkins  
(1562-1622)  
English explorer and pirate
Anecdotal report  
•Avoid too much salt meat  
•Keep the ship clean  
•Keep busy - exercise
More of Hawkins’ Cures
•“oil of vitry” – sulfuric 
acid 
•“The ayre [air] of the 
land”  
•“sower oranges and 
lemmons”
An anecdotal report is a 
low standard of scientific 
evidence today.   
Interesting but not 
conclusive.  Sir James Lancaster 
(1554-1618)
•1601 the “Red Dragon” travelled 
to India as part of a squadron of 
four ships  
•By South Africa all except Admiral 
Lancaster’s ship had scurvy  
•He (“the general”) had provided 
lemon juice on his ship  
•A controlled study (confounding 
variables?)
Griffin (2013)  
doi:  10.1177/0141076813478788
Controlled Experiment or Clinical Trial
PopulationTreatment  
group
Control  
groupInterventionTreatment  
group
Control  
groupΔ>0 Δ=0A Clinical Trial aboard HMS Salisbury 1747
•Group 1: A quart of hard cider a day  
•Group 2: 25 drops of vitriol (sulfuric acid)  
•Group 3: Six spoonful's of vinegar  
•Group 4: Half a pint of seawater  
•Group 5: two oranges and a lemon (ran out 
of fruit in a week)  
•Group 6: Spice blend
James Lind  (1716-1794)A putrefaction of the body that could be relived by 
acids?  Take groups of sick sailors on the same ship 
and give them different treatments.. 
Ship’s surgeon interested in what went 
wrong on Anson’s expeditionPublished in 1753, 400 pages, citrus fruit was one paragraph
Lind really thought it was about an 
imbalance of the humors caused by 
blocked sweat glands. The medical 
orthodoxy of his dayhttps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC539665/Phlegmatic  - 
apathy  
(phlegm)
Choleric  - 
aggression  
(yellow bile)Sanguine  - 
optimistic  
(blood)
Melancholic  
- depression  
(black bile)
https://fineartamerica.com/
featured/four-humors-
granger.htmlHumors
ColdWet
DryHot
EARTHWATER AIR
FIREScurvyThe practical  elimination of scurvy in the British Navy in the 18 th 
Century before  the scientific/medical establishment was convinced  
•Example: James Cook’s voyage to Australia (1768-1771) took an orange and lemon 
syrup (“rob”), wort (from crushed sprouted grains) and sauerkraut.  
•1795 Some form of lemon juice became a required part of the rations of the British 
navy. Most commonly given as limes (“limeys”) and frequently as a syrup  
•C19 steam ships cut journey times, other food technologies provided fresher foods  
•Scurvy did not go away (C19, C20 arctic explorers)20th Century Scurvy (!)
https://www.rcpe.ac.uk/sites/default/files/butler.pdf
Robert Scott’s Expedition to the South Pole, 1912•Scott’s diary: “ Sir Almroth Wright* has hit 
the truth, he (Atkinson) thinks, in finding 
increased acidity of blood – acid 
intoxication – by methods only possible in 
recent years… In brief, he holds the first 
cause to be tainted food but secondary or 
contributory causes may be even more 
potent in developing the disease. Damp, 
cold, over-exertion, bad air, bad light, in 
fact, any condition exceptional to normal 
healthy existence. ”
*Prominent military doctor of the time. Very wrong.Ascorbic acid (Anti-scorbutic acid)
•Purified the compound (“hexuronic acid”) in 
1927  
•Showed it prevented scurvy (in guinea 
pigs*) in 1933  
•Industrial scale synthesis in 1933 (not Szent-
Györgyi)  
•All of this was MUCH later than that 
practical solution of scurvy in public healthAlbert Szent-György i
Hungarian Biochemis t
(1893-1986 )
Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, 1937
Vitamins  
Part 3: Pellagra and Beriberi
Cornbread, meat and molasses – Sonny TerryPellagra epidemic in the South in the Early 
Twentieth Century
•Vitamin B3 (niacin) deficiency. Some 
capacity to synthesize in the body from 
tryptophan (an amino acid)  
•Symptoms: “Four Ds” - dementia, 
diarrhea, dermatitis and death  
•First American case reported 1902. 
Previously seen in Italy, epidemic in the 
South in the 1920s. Up to 50% mortality. 
10,000 died in 1929
Pellagra caused dermatological 
eruptions, often in a “butterfly” 
pattern.The “New South” in the Early Twentieth Century
•Cotton mill villages, 
sharecroppers and tenant 
farmers (debt), company stores  
•Diet - Fatback bacon, molasses, 
coffee and (midwestern) corn  
•Epidemic driven by  
•poverty,  
•cotton monoculture,   
•commercial (midwestern) corn 
milling
 Dry milling -->  
Bran  + Grits + Germ“Puzzling Pellagra”  
(NYT 1921)
•A deficiency disease driven by 
poverty? US Federal public 
health service  
•An infectious disease? 
waterborne? disseminated by 
insects?  
•”Spoiled maize” theory  
•Nothing at all…
Puzzling Pellagra, The New York Times, July 31, 1921
NYT, July 27, 
1921
Patients were shunned 
“Arsenic, salvarsan, calcium 
sulfide, iron, strychnine, 
quinine, autoserotherapy, 
partial appendectomy, and 
static electric shock were 
some of the prescribed 
therapies”Why did these hypotheses 
make sense?Federal Investigations from 1914
•Georgia State Sanatorium study (control 
and treatment group on sick people)  
•Rankin State Prison Farm (9 months 
intervention on healthy  prisoners, pardons 
for participants)  
•(“Seven were convicted murderers serving 
life terms. Two were wealthy brothers, 
serving time for embezzlement after their 
bank had failed. The brothers were friends of 
the governor”)Joseph Goldberger (1874-1929)  
began his studies in the South in 
1914
Medical ethics?•Early efforts to treat the disease – yeast 
– were successful but often resisted  
•Findings continued to be disputed 
throughout the South (”Filth Parties”)
1927 Mississippi Flood•A deficiency disease driven by 
poverty? US Federal public 
health service  
•An infectious disease? 
waterborne? disseminated by 
insects?  
•”Spoiled maize” theory  
•Nothing at all…Joseph Goldberger 
(1874-1929)
Finding the  
chemical cause
•Vitamin identified 1938  
•Government mandated 
supplementation of bread in 
1941  
•A miraculous  chemical that 
can restore health
NY Times, March 20, 1938
NY Times, Aug 27, 1942Vitamin B3 (niacin)  
i.e., niacinBeriberi   
Thiamin (B1) deficiency  
•Muscular weakness  
•Paralysis (often legs)  
•Weakness  
•Increased heat rate  
•Edema (swelling of legs)
Rice Polishing
http://www.oilmillmachinery.net/•Brown rice 0-2-0.6 mg thiamin per 100 g  
•White rice 0.02-0.1 mg thiamin per 100 g  
•RDA ~ 1mg/day
How did industrialization  (steam powered, steel rollers) 
change this process?•Eijkman was Dutch, trained with Robert Koch 
in Germany (~1885), worked in Indonesia  
(Dutch East Indies) (1890s) to deal with a 
beriberi epidemic  
•Chicken experiments. Animal studies  
•Inject blood from infected humans  
•No “military rice for civilian chickens” – Chickens 
on unpolished (brown) rice recovered  
•The “anti-beriberi factor” prevented toxin in white 
rice having an effect  
•Prison observations (1 in 10,000 on brown 
rice, 1 in 39 on white rice). Epidemiology  
•Still believed that Beriberi was a disease that 
could be cured
Christiaan Eijkman (1858-1930)  
1929 Nobel Prize in Physiology or MedicineVitamins  
Part 4: Vitamins as Marketing
“And today you can buy the new 
enriched white bread – with all its 
extra Vitamin B1, niacin, and iron – 
and be much more certain your 
diet is up to full war standards”
Early fortified cereal (1923-1970s)Food+ Vitamins 
-> strength, 
masculinity, 
“pep”
What do vitamins 
mean now?
Jelly Bean rule – prevents fortification of 
foods with limited nutritional valueNext time…
Does food cause/cure cancer? 
The Daily Mail is a British 
tabloid newspaper (in)famous 
for its health reporting. This 
website tries to keep track of 
everything, often foods, they 
have claimed  either causes or 
prevents cancer. How do we 
make sense of all this?
http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-1047508/Reheated-
spaghetti-bolognese-prevents-cancer.html  
https://news.osu.edu/news/2008/08/13/lycoproc/
The press releaseLycopene
trans cis
Natural form•The idea “ epidemiological evidence 
continues to suggest that it may provide 
protection against a number of cancers 
and other degenerative diseases ” 
•Canned tomato sauce (+10% corn oil) 
processed to two temperatures to make 
different forms of lycopene (all trans vs. 
some cis)  
•Conclusion “we observed a significant 
increase in lycopene absorption when 
tomato sauce was enriched in cis-isomers 
by heat treatment, being in agreement with 
the hypothesis that cis-lycopene isomers 
are preferentially absorbed in man”
Unlu, N. Z., Bohn, T., Francis, D. M., Nagaraja, H. N., Clinton, S. K., & Schwartz, S. J. (2007).
Examples of cis-lycopeneCause and Effect for Disease
•Microorganisms (Koch’s postulates)  
•Vitamin deficiency (observation and diet control)  
•Chronic, diet-related disease is harder.  
•Some people eat the food and get the disease  
•Some people eat the food and don’t  
•Some people don’t eat the food and get the disease  
•Some people don’t eat the food and doProbabilistic 
causeDeterministic 
causeThe Gold 
Standard: 
Randomized 
Controlled 
Trial (RCT)•Take a large enough  group of people  
•Divide randomly  into two groups  
•Give one the treatment give the other a placebo  
•Wait sufficient time and measure the outcome  
•If significantly  more people in the treatment group see an effect, 
then we can say that was caused by the treatment?
See “Vitamins” classProblem: Design a RCT to find out if lycopene 
(or tomatoes) can prevent prostate cancer
•Who is going to be in your 
study?  
•What is your treatment/
placebo?  
•For how long?  
•What is your measured 
outcome?
What are the practical and ethical problems with this approach? 
Epidemiology - The Framingham Study
•1948 Framingham, Ma. 5209 adult subjects with no history of heart disease  
•A prospective cohort study . Identify a population of healthy people and watch them closely over years. 
Cohort studies are expensive.  
•Interested in dietary effects on cardiovascular disease*  
•Risk factor – a variable associated with increased incidence of the disease  
•Blood pressure risk factor for stroke  
•Smoking  
•High HDL (“bad”) cholesterol  
•Obesity  
•Exercise is preventativeIn many cases a RCT may not be possible or ethical.  There are alternatives.
*Not lycopene or cancerEpidemiology finds statistical relationships
•What else might 
cause a difference?
Level of tomato consumptionNumber with 
cancer in 20 years
None Low Medium High Very high
https://xkcd.com/552/Hypothetical resultsWhat does correlation teach us?
1.In the 80s, rates of street crime in NYC were shown to correlate with ice cream 
sales  
2.In the early elementary school years, astrological sign is correlated with IQ, but 
this correlation weakens with age and disappears by adulthood.  
3.The length of the “lifeline” on your palm is inversely correlated to longevity  
4.Children who get tutored get worse grades than children who do not get 
tutored  
5.Consumption of chocolate in a country correlates the number of Nobel prizes  
6.Consumption of non-nutritive sweeteners (e.g., aspartame) correlates with 
higher body mass index  
7.Male drivers are more likely to be involved in accidents than female drivers
Correlation can’t prove causation - but sometimes that might not matter https://www.google.com/trends/correlate/Example: Epidemiological evidence that tomato sauce intake 
is correlated with reduced incidence of prostate cancer 
•Cohort: Health Professionals Follow-up Study. A prospective cohort study 
of 51,529 U.S. male medical professionals aged 40–75 in 1986.  
•Measure: Food intake questionnaires in 1986, 1990, 1994. Physicians' 
reports of prostate cancer to 1998 (2481 cases)  
•Relative risk for 2+ servings tomato sauce/week versus <1 serving/month 
= 0.77.  
•“Other variables, including body mass index, aspirin use, marital status, 
ancestry, geographic region of residence, level of physical activity, 
vasectomy, smoking habits, and alcohol use also were not confounders.”  
•“So should I eat tomato sauce to prevent prostate cancer?”
Giovannucci E (2002) A Prospective Study of Tomato Products, Lycopene, and Prostate Cancer Risk. Journal of the National Cancer Institute 94:391–398
Who cares? Heinz petitioned FDA 
on Lycopene and Prostate Health 
(2004)
FDA response (2005), a qualified claim : 
“Very limited and preliminary scientific 
research suggests that eating one-half to 
one cup of tomatoes and/or tomato sauce a 
week may reduce the risk of prostate cancer. 
FDA concludes that there is little scientific 
evidence supporting this claim."
Next time…
Dietary Advice
Obama era public health 
campaign against 
childhood obesity 
The National Potato Council, for 
example, said the proposal to offer fewer 
weekly servings of potatoes in favor of 
other vegetables and fruits was overly 
restrictive. “Everyone thinks that the only 
thing kids eat in school are French fries,” 
said John Keeling, the council’s 
executive vice president and chief 
executive. “But 90 percent of the 
potatoes served in schools are baked, 
boiled or mashed.”A brief history of the government telling us 
what we should eat
•What would government 
be interested at the start 
of the 20 th Century?  
•What would government 
be interested in at the 
end of the 20 th Century?  
•Who else might be 
interested?
http://www.cc.com/video-clips/qyadrw/the-colbert-report-
obama-administration-replaces-food-pyramidUSDA Farmers’ Bulletin, 1894  
https://www.ers.usda.gov/webdocs/publications/
42215/5831_aib750b_1_.pdf?v=41055
https://emilycontois.com/2015/01/01/a-history-of-food-guides-told-
through-photos-and-butter/
https://www.ars.usda.gov/ARSUserFiles/80400530/pdf/hist/
oes_1894_farm_bul_23.pdf“A quart of milk, three-quarters of a pound of moderately fat 
beef, sirloin steak for instance, and five ounces of wheat flour, 
all contain about the same amount of nutritive material; but 
we pay different prices for them and they have different values 
for nutriment. The milk comes nearest to being a perfect food. 
It contains all of the different kinds of nutritive materials that 
the body needs. Bread made from the wheat flour will support 
life. It contains all of the necessary ingredients for 
nourishment, but not in the proportions best adapted for 
ordinary use. A man might live on beef alone, but it would be a 
very one-sided and imperfect diet. But meat and bread 
together make the essentials of a healthful diet. Such are the 
facts of experience. The advancing science of later years 
explains them. This explanation takes into account, not 
simply quantities of meat and bread and milk and other 
materials which we eat, but also the nutritive ingredients or 
"nutrients" which they contain.”The calorimeter guyAtwater measured  food composition and 
calories
•Food was [water + fat + proteins + 
carbohydrates+ “ash”]  
•Protein was the “flesh builder” + a little “fuel”  
•Fat and carbohydrates were just “fuel”  
•Balance between protein and fat/carbs was the 
secret to a healthy diet.  
•-> How can I get these nutrients for the least 
money?
(remember from the Calorie lecture)How to Select Foods (1917)
•Caroline Hunt with Helen Woodward Atwater 
(Wilbur Olin Atwater’s daughter)  
•The first USDA food guide  
•First mention of food groups “You need some 
food from each group every day – don’t skip 
any.”  foundational  diet 
•Trying to ensure known and unknown 
nutrients
Caroline Hunt  
1865-1927  
First prof of Home Economics, 
University of Wisconsin“diversity and multiplicity of aliments is 
an important rule of hygiene; which is, 
moreover, indicated to us by our 
instincts”  - François Magendie, 1815
•Minerals  
•Protein  
•Starch  
•Sugar  
•Fats 
•Cellulose  
•“Certain newly 
discovered 
substances in very 
small amounts”  
•Flavorings and 
condiments
Nutrients   -> Foods
https://archive.org/stream/howtoselectfoods00hunt#page/8/mode/2upWW2
•USDA released the Basic Seven 
food guide (1943)  
•A foundation diet to give most of 
the nutrients “in addition to the 
basic seven eat any other foods 
you want”
1950s
•Basic Four (1956)   
•Focus on getting enough nutrients  
•Again a foundational diet
1970s: Should we be avoiding some 
food?
•The Hassle-Free Food Guide (1979-1994)  
•Basic four plus a group to avoid  (fats, sweets, alcohol)  
•“Nutrition and Your Health: Dietary Guidelines for Americans (USDA 
and DHHS, 1980). The guidelines called for a variety of foods to 
provide essential nutrients while maintaining recommended body 
weight and moderating  dietary constituents fat, saturated fat, 
cholesterol, and sodium that might be risk factors in certain chronic 
diseases. Although the guidelines were directional, not quantitative, 
their release prompted some concern  among consumer, commodity, 
and food industry groups as well as nutrition scientists who 
questioned the causal relationship between certain guidelines and 
health.”
What were the political 
consequences of this change?https://health.gov/dietaryguidelines/2015-binder/meeting1/
historycurrentuse.aspx1990s-present: Dietary Guidelines for 
Americans
•“The Dietary Guidelines  is required under the 1990 National Nutrition 
Monitoring and Related Research Act, which states that every 5 years, 
the U.S. Departments of Agriculture (USDA)  and Health and Human 
Services (HHS) must jointly publish a report containing nutritional and 
dietary information and guidelines for the general public. The statute 
(Public Law 101-445, 7 U.S.C. 5341 et seq.) requires that the Dietary 
Guidelines  be based on the preponderance of current scientific and 
medical knowledge. “
https://www.cnpp.usda.gov/dietary-guidelinesi.e., a science based dietChanges in the 2015 DGA – mainly nutrients
•Cholesterol limit no longer included, Sat/trans fat – maintained  
•Sodium limits tweaked (<2,300 mg per day for most)  
•Added sugar "consume less than 10 percent of calories per day from 
added sugars.”  
•Protein.  
•From 2010 "replace protein foods that are higher in solid fats with choices that 
are lower in solid fats and calories and/or are sources of oils”  
•To 2015 "a variety of protein foods, including seafood, lean meats and poultry, 
eggs, legumes (beans and peas), and nuts, seeds, and soy products.”Five-year revisions2020 Guidelines – a shift?
•Specific guidelines across 
lifespan  
•Limit foods and beverages 
higher in added sugars, 
saturated fat, and sodium, and 
limit alcoholic beverages  
•Customize and enjoy nutrient-
dense food and beverage 
choices to reflect personal 
preferences, cultural traditions, 
and budgetary considerations
Continued…“An underlying premise of the Dietary Guidelines is that nutritional needs 
should be met primarily from foods and beverages—specifically, nutrient-dense 
foods and beverages. Nutrient-dense foods provide vitamins, minerals, and 
other health-promoting components and have no or little added sugars, 
saturated fat, and sodium. A healthy dietary pattern consists of nutrient-dense 
forms of foods and beverages across all food groups, in recommended 
amounts, and within calorie limits. The core elements that make up a healthy 
dietary pattern include:  
•Vegetables of all types  
•Fruits, especially whole fruit  
•Grains, at least half of which are whole grain  
•Dairy, including fat-free or low-fat milk, yogurt, and cheese, and/or lactose-free versions 
and fortified soy beverages and yogurt as alternatives  
•Protein foods, including lean meats, poultry, and eggs; seafood; beans, peas, and lentils; 
and nuts, seeds, and soy products  
•Oils, including vegetable oils and oils in food, such as seafood and nutsImplementation – Dietary Advice
2011-now 1992-2005 2005-2011
A total diet  (eat this) not a foundational diet  (make sure you eat these)Implementation
•1990 National Labelling and 
Education Act.  
•Nutrition facts panels
Is this a science-based diet?
•“Food Politics” 2002  
•Where could science be influenced?
Marion Nestle (1936-)  
NYU Professor“replace protein foods that 
are higher in solid fats with 
choices that are lower in 
solid fats and calories and/
or are sources of oils”  
2010 DGA•People eat food - Scientists study nutrients  
•How can we hope to know the relationships 
between nutrients and chronic disease?  
•2020 DGA reflects this view more strongly “An 
underlying premise of the Dietary Guidelines is 
that nutritional needs should be met primarily 
from foods and beverages—specifically, 
nutrient-dense foods and beverages ”
Gyorgy Scrinis
Is this Nutritionism? : Reducing food and food choice 
to its component nutrients. Ultra-processed Food
•Group 1: Unprocessed 
or minimally processed 
(fruits, vegetables, 
meat)  
•Group 2: Processed 
culinary and food 
industry ingredients  
(flour, sugar)  
•Group 3: ultra-processed 
food products. Typically 
made in factories from 
Group 2Carlos Monteiro,  
Brazilian nutritionist, 2010s•1. Make natural or minimally processed foods the basis 
of your diet  
•2. Use oils, fats, salt, and sugar in small amounts when 
seasoning and cooking natural or minimally processed 
foods and to create culinary preparations  
•3. Limit consumption of processed foods  
•4. Avoid consumption of ultra-processed foods  
•5. Eat regularly and carefully in appropriate 
environments and, whenever possible, in company  
•6. Shop in places that offer a variety of natural or 
minimally processed foods  
•7. Develop, exercise and share cooking skills  
•8. Plan your time to make food and eating important in 
your life  
•9.Out of home, prefer places that serve freshly made 
meals  
•10. Be wary of food advertising and marketingBrazilian Food Guidelines (NOVA)
Which is better? Why?
Is even this nutritionism (or worse)?
•Is being healthy the only reason we should choose food?  Food is much 
more than a sum of nutrients  
•Early 20 th century reformers taught immigrants to “Eat Right” by 
cooking American foods. Is dietary advice always just social control?
“First lessons in food and 
diet” – Ellen Richards, 
1904Next time…
Purity
Leek, 1972~2,500 BCE
Adulteration: to make food impure by 
adding foreign or inferior ingredients.  
•usually economically motivated  
•possibly dangerous  
•as old as civilization  
 
Adulteration of foods
•Ancient Egypt  
•Early Modern England  
•Reaction – Controversy  
•Industrial England  
•Reaction – Science  
•Industrial America  
•Reaction – The Pure Foods Laws  
•Contemporary adulteration  
•What is adulteration?The bread I eat in London, is a deleterious 
paste, mixed up with chalk, alum, and bone-
ashes; insipid to the taste, and destructive to 
the constitution. The good people are not 
ignorant of this adulteration -- but they prefer  
it to wholesome bread, because it is whiter 
than the meal of corn*: thus they sacrifice 
their taste and their health, and the lives of 
their tender infants, to a most absurd 
gratification of a misjudging eye; and the 
miller, or the baker, is obliged  to poison them 
and their families, in order to live by his 
profession. Tobias Smollett (1771)
(modern period, early 
European industrialization) *Outside the US, ”corn” often means any cereal crop“A treatise on 
adulterations of 
food and culinary 
poisons”  
1821
Fredrich Accum 
(1769-1838)
The new science of chemistry  
increased capacity to 
measure food composition 
and adulteration as well as to 
make new adulterantsSome of Accum’s Examples
•Water in milk, beer  
•Chalk in flour  
•“Sweepings” in black pepper  
•Sulfuric acid in vinegar  
•“Red lead” (lead oxide) in cayenne pepper
What are the common features of a “good” adulterant?
Adulteration may be dangerous but its always dishonest
UK passed food safety/purity laws by 1860. The US didn’tModern industrial food created new types of food 
and new ways they could be adulterated. The scale 
and reach of the potential adulterations was larger, 
and their effects unknownEarly C20 Arguments about a Pure Food and 
Drug Bill
“Food companies are filling 
our food with deceptive 
and sometime dangerous 
undeclared preservatives““Additives are necessary to 
for our food supply to be 
affordable and free from 
dangerous bacteria”
•Harvey Washington Wiley (Chief 
Chemist, USDA) and state agencies  
•Women’s movement (Progressive 
Politics)  
•Muckraking journalists  
•American medical association  
•State food inspectors•Food packing companies  
•Politicians interested in supporting 
commerce or concerned with the 
overreach of federal authority  
Political change needs a crisisHarvey Washington Wiley
•Indiana native, civil war veteran,  medical 
doctor, Purdue chemistry professor  
•Chief chemist at USDA (1882-1912)  
•Ran the ”Poison Squad” (studied – borax, 
sulfites, …)  
•Although a government employee, he 
campaigned for strong pure food laws
(1844-1930)•Born Reading, Pa  
•Penn State Professor of Agricultural 
Chemistry (1885-1922)  
•1904 Chaired FDA Food Standards 
Advisory CommitteeWilliam Frear  
 (1860-1922)Sinclair, 1905 Swift & Co.'s Packing House 1906
“It will be the Uncle 
Tom’s Cabin of the 
Socialist Movement”1905
Upton Sinclair  
(1878-1968)
Socialist, author, 
and campaigner. 
Interested in labor 
rights“There was never the least attention paid to what was cut up for sausage; there 
would come all the way back from Europe old sausage that had been rejected, 
and that was moldy and white–it would be dosed with borax and glycerine, and 
dumped into the hoppers, and made over again for home consumption. There 
would be meat that had tumbled out on the floor, in the dirt and sawdust, where 
the workers had tramped and spit uncounted billions of consumption germs. 
There would be meat stored in great piles in rooms; and the water from leaky 
roofs would drip over it, and thousands of rats would race about on it. It was too 
dark in these storage places to see well, but a man could run his hand over these 
piles of meat and sweep off handfuls of the dried dung of rats. These rats were 
nuisances, and the packers would put poisoned bread out for them; they would 
die, and then rats, bread, and meat would go into the hoppers together. This is 
no fairy story and no joke; the meat would be shoveled into carts, and the man 
who did the shoveling would not trouble to lift out a rat even when he saw one– 
there were things that went into the sausage in comparison with which a 
poisoned rat was a tidbit.”  The Pure  Food and Drug Act of 1906
•First. If any substance has been mixed and packed with it so as to reduce  or lower  or injuriously 
affect its quality or strength.  
•Second. If any substance has been substituted  wholly or in part for the article.  
•Third. If any valuable constituent of the article has been wholly or in part abstracted . 
•Fourth. If it be mixed, colored, powdered, coated, or stained in a manner whereby damage or 
inferiority is concealed . 
•Fifth. If it contain any added  poisonous  or other added  deleterious  ingredient  which may 
render such article injurious to health: Provided, That when in the preparation of food products 
for shipment they are preserved by any external application applied in such manner that the 
preservative is necessarily removed mechanically, or by maceration in water, or otherwise, and 
directions for the removal of said preservative shall be printed on the covering or the package, 
the provisions of this Act shall be construed as applying only when said products are ready for 
consumption.  
•Sixth. If it consists in whole or in part of a filthy, decomposed, or putrid animal or vegetable 
substance, or any portion of an animal unfit for food, whether manufactured or not, or if it is 
the product of a diseased animal, or one that has died otherwise than by slaughter.2007 China Melamine Scandal
Melamine•Multiple foods, including dairy foods were found to contain melamine  
•54,000 babies hospitalized with kidney damage. Six deaths  
•Added as “protein powder” to watered down milk.  
•The standard methods for protein analysis measured nitrogen  because 
fats and carbohydrates contain no nitrogen while proteins do.
Illegal-DangerousModern AdulterationLegal-SafeWhich of these 
foods is 
adulterated?Modern Adulteration – not always clear
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0xyNNlU4ct8  Tropicana is a PepsiCo Brand
•Florida Valencia Oranges 
in season February-May  
•Squeeze the juice  
•Deoxygenate and heat-
treat  
•Store aseptically (i.e., 
aseptic processing)  
•Package with added flavor 
oils (flavor packs)
http://civileats.com/2009/05/06/freshly-squeezed-the-truth-about-orange-juice-in-boxes/
http://www.cabinetmagazine.org/issues/47/twilley.phpHow can you get 
an “oak” taste in 
California 
Chardonnay 
without 
“adulteration”?
http://www.winestix.com/winestix-tank-
staves-french-oak/Legal-SafeModern Adulteration
vanillinAdulteration Summary
•As old as agriculture but more prevalent in industrial 
societies with non-interventionist regulatory 
systems  
•Usually economically driven  
•Perhaps hazardous, perhaps not  
•Usually dishonest  
•Depends on a definition of ”pure” or non-adulterated 
which may not be clear  
•Adulteration can drive an industry “down” or allow 
companies to differentiate themselves with “better” 
brands 
(1909 Heinz ad)
Next time…
Toxicity
•Reasons food can be toxic  
A.Deliberate poisoning  
B.Endogenous toxins  
C.Contaminations  
D.Poisons from traditional processing  
•“T oxins”
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/poisonBig underlying 
question: Why are 
we afraid of some of 
these more than 
others?(A) Deliberate Poisoning – Tylenol Murders
•Chicago Sept 1982  
•Cyanide ~10,000 times lethal 
dose added to Tylenol  
•7 dead, murderer never found  
•All Tylenol products withdrawn 
from sale for a period, then 
relaunched with new packaging
https://ourstory.jnj.com/tylenol-triple-seal-packaging(B) Endogenous Toxins - 
Caffeine
•Bitter taste, naturally derived 
from several plants  
•Stimulant, mildly addictive  
•Toxic at high concentrations 
At what age did you 
start drinking coffee?Caffeine 
Toxicity
•0.5 – 1 g: Headache, 
Nausea, Sleeplessness, 
Excitement, Palpitations  
•1 – 10 g, Delirium, Tremors, 
Hypertension, Arrhythmia, 
Hyperthermia  
•>10 g death
http://www.energyfiend.com/the-caffeine-database  
Trabulo, D., Marques, S., & Pedroso, E. (2011). Caffeinated energy drink intoxication. Emergency Medicine Journal , 28(8), 712–714. Caffeine (mg)
200 mg per serving  
100 mg per fl. ozA 28-year-old man was brought to the emergency room of our 
hospital after sudden onset of tonic-clonic seizures. The 
patient had no history of head trauma and denied 
experiencing any seizure-provoking factors, such as sleep 
deprivation, illicit drug or recent alcohol abuse, fever or 
infection. His friends reported that he had drunk several cans 
(about 6) of a caffeinated energy drink (‘Red Bull’) together 
with coffee in 4 h. He had a past history of heroin and cocaine 
consumption, chronic hepatitis C, severe mitral insufficiency 
and post-infectious endocarditis. His occupational history was 
also investigated. He had been living in a recovery and 
rehabilitation centre for 2 years and he was working in an 
‘action against hunger’ (based in resettlement back into 
society) when he suddenly developed generalised tonic-clonic 
seizures with subsequent loss of consciousness. The seizure 
lasted about 10 min and the patient remained inconscient for 
a period of time.Caffeine and Alcohol – Four Loko
•“Energy Drink”. Sweet, fruity flavor, 6-14% 
alcohol, caffeinated (~coffee)  
•Cheap ~$2. Large container  (24 oz, ~3 beers 
and 3 coffees)  
•2010 became very popular amongst youth 
(“Everything’s gone Four Loko”)  
•FDA ruled in this application  caffeine is an 
“unsafe food additive”. Masking effect?  
•Reformulated without caffeine (2010)
https://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/2014/03/rip-four-loko/359602/
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l1R0EnzGB3I(B) Endogenous Toxins  - Cassava
•Cassava (or mannioc or yucca)  
•Cyanide is present as cyanogenic 
glycosides broken down during digestion 
to release cyanide. Bitter cassava (>400 
mg/kg cyanide) and sweet cassava (<50 
mg/kg cyanide)  
•Process by peeling, scraping, soaking 
(fermentation) then cooking to release 
cyanide gas  
•Improper processing gives acute or 
chronic toxicity (e.g., Konzo , ”bound legs” 
in W. Africa – reading requirement )Digestive/microbial 
enzymes Lotaustralin
Cyanide Cyanogenic glycoside(C) Contaminations - 
Aflatoxin
•Poisonous and carcinogenic compounds 
from molds that grow on commodity crops 
(esp. grains, peanuts stored improperly)  
•Acute toxicity in children (stunting, liver 
damage)  
•Chronic toxicity – liver cancer (perhaps 
~100 cases per year in the USA, ~25% of 
liver cancer deaths in China)
Barrett, J. (2005). Liver Cancer and Aflatoxin. Science Selections 
Environmental Health Perspectives , 113(12), 836–838.Fan, J. H., Wang, J. B., Jiang, Y ., Xiang, W., Liang, H., Wei, W. Q., 
… Boffetta, P . (2013). Attributable causes of liver cancer 
mortality and incidence in China. Asian Pacific Journal of 
Cancer Prevention , 14(12), 7251–7256. 
http://theagriknot.info/small-
agribusiness-management-101-
how-aflatoxins-affect-your-dairy-
business/“The Kenyan outbreak followed a poor 
harvest of maize that had been damaged 
and made susceptible to mold by 
drought. Furthermore, to guard against 
theft of the meager harvest, people 
stored the maize in their homes, which 
were warmer and moister than the 
granaries where it was usually stored. 
From January to June 2004, 317 people 
sought hospital treatment for symptoms 
of liver failure, and 125 died. Health 
officials ruled out viral liver diseases; 
suspecting acute aflatoxin poisoning, 
they examined maize samples and found 
aflatoxin B1 concentrations as high as 
4,400 parts per billion (ppb), 220 times 
the Kenyan limit for food.”(D) Toxins from Processing – 
Carcinogens in Cooked Food
•The Maillard reaction between sugars 
and proteins is responsible for flavors 
and colors in cooked food  
•Also produces carcinogenic compounds 
(e.g., acrylamide, heterocyclic amines)  
•Control via temperature (lower), heating 
time (shorter), pH (less acid is better), 
washing surface (remove sugars), 
reducing asparagine (an amino acid 
precursor of acrylamide) (e.g., Innate 
potatoes)
https://www.chemistryworld.com/news/us-approves-low-
acrylamide-spud-/8010.article , http://www.innatepotatoes.com/acrylamideAre there ways to reduce HCA (heterocyclic amines) and PAH 
(polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons) formation in cooked meats?
•Avoiding direct exposure of meat to an open flame or a hot metal surface and 
avoiding prolonged cooking times (especially at high temperatures) can help 
reduce HCA and PAH formation .
•Using a microwave oven to cook meat prior to exposure to high temperatures 
can also substantially reduce HCA formation by reducing the time that meat 
must be in contact with high heat to finish cooking .
•Continuously turning meat over on a high heat source can substantially reduce 
HCA formation compared with just leaving the meat on the heat source without 
flipping it often .
•Removing charred portions of meat and refraining from using gravy made from 
meat drippings can also reduce HCA and PAH exposure.
Mild and infrequent 
government warningsCalifornia prop 65  
(“Safe Drinking Water and Toxic 
Enforcement Act of 1986”)
- Washington Post , 
Feb 2018•2005 lawsuit over 
acrylamide in potato 
chips (settled)  
•Recent lawsuit about 
warnings on coffee
Image courtesy: Don Schaffner, 2014
Compare the different levels of social reaction to these potential toxins in food
Logos – what is the risk?Pathos: Psychological factors affecting risk perception
•Trust - accept more risk from sources we trust  
•Risk vs. Benefit - accept risk when we see a worthwhile associated benefit  
•Control - more tolerant of risks when we feel we are in control  
•Natural or Human made.  
•Uncertainty - less tolerant of risks that are not fully understood  
•Vulnerable groups (children)  
•Novelty – new things are seen as more risky  
•Publicity – if it’s in the news at the moment, it must be important to me
https://dropeik.com/  
Next time…
Ethical Concerns
Ethical concerns: Is there a “right” or a “wrong” way to treat 
animals?  
•Traditional ways of doing things  
•Religious commandments  
The enlightenment!!!!! Cogito ergo sum of all things
Duty-based ethics – 
there are some 
things you just can’t 
doUtilitarianism  – an 
action is right or 
wrong based on its 
consequencesUtilitarianism•Hedonism – maximizing pleasure and minimizing 
suffering is all that matters  
•Very mathematical in nature – if you can quantify 
happiness, you know the right thing to do
By the principle of utility is meant that principle which 
approves or disapproves of every action whatsoever, according 
to the tendency it appears to have to augment or diminish the 
happiness of the party whose interest is in question: or, what 
is the same thing in other words, to promote or to oppose that 
happiness. I say of every action whatsoever, and therefore not 
only of every action of a private individual, but of every 
measure of government.  
In: An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation, 
1780
Jenemy Bentham  
(1748-1832)The Trolley Problem - Utilitarian
but Utilitarianism can get you to some strange places
The Organ DonorWhose happiness matters?
What else is it that should trace the insuperable line? Is it the 
faculty of reason, or, perhaps, the faculty of discourse? But a full-
grown horse or dog is beyond comparison a more rational, as well 
as a more conversable animal, than an infant of a day, or a week, or 
even a month, old. But suppose the case were otherwise, what 
would it avail? the question is not, Can they reason? nor, Can they 
talk? but, Can they suffer?  
In: An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation, 1780
Jenemy Bentham  
(1748-1832)Utilitarianism and Animal Ethics
•No-one (OK – few people) really thinks animals can’t 
feel pain or enjoy pleasure - so shouldn't they fit into 
Mill’s utilitarian accounting?
Peter Singer  
(1946-)
“Animal 
Liberation” - 1975
PhilosopherDuty-Ethics 
(Deontological ethics)
•People have certain inalienable rights just 
because they’re people that can’t be 
outweighed by utilitarian considerations  
•Rights may be God-given  
•Alternatively, Kant derived the Categorical 
Imperative without reference to god: “ Act 
only according to that maxim by which 
you can at the same time will that it 
should become a universal law”. Meaning 
anything you do, should also be good if 
applied by someone else, somewhere 
else.
 Immanuel Kant (1724-1804)“We hold these truths to be self-evident: 
that all men are created equal; that they 
are endowed by their Creator with 
certain unalienable rights; that among 
these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of 
happiness.”  
US Declaration of Independence, 1776 
(Thomas Jefferson)
It is wrong to 
treat a person 
as a means to 
an end rather 
than as an end 
in themselves
German philosopherThe Trolley Problem – Rights-Based Ethics
https://www.mcsweeneys.net/articles/
lesser-known-trolley-problem-variations
The Organ DonorRights and Animal Ethics
•Can we make a distinction between 
humans and animals? Perhaps 
biological complexity, consciousness, 
have a preference about their 
future,…)  
•Does that mean all animals/people 
have equal rights?  
•Where do draw the line between 
alive-with-rights and alive-without 
rights?
But does 
anyone believe 
it?
http://www.bbc.co.uk/ethics/animals/rights/rights_1.shtml
Would you save the dog or 
the person from a burning 
building?
https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/animals-and-us/201306/would-you-
save-puppy-or-child-burning-buildinghttp://www.columbia.edu/~col8/lobsterarticle.pdfEthical Arguments for eating meat 
– to give animals a good life
“It is our duty to provide the animals that we raise 
for food with a decent life. I often get asked, “How 
can you care about animals and be involved in 
designing systems in slaughter houses that are used 
to kill them?” I answered this question in 1990, after 
I had just completed installation of a new piece of 
equipment I had designed for handling cattle at 
slaughter plants. I was standing on a catwalk, as 
hundreds of cattle passed below to enter my system. 
In a moment of insight, I thought, none of the cattle 
going into my system would have existed unless 
people had bred and raised them .”Temple Grandin (1947-)
Animal scientist
Surveys suggest the 
proportion of vegans (0.5%)  
and vegetarians (3.5%) is 
very low.  How might surveys 
be unreliable?Next time…
